A[a] Building Boom for Nuclear Power Plants
The men who make and sell nuclear power plants are convinced that they've finally won over the nation's utilities.
It's been a long, hard struggle against environmentalists, rising costs, people who question the safety of nuclear energy and the utilities' cyclical ordering pattern. The struggle dates back to Dec. 18, 1957, when the nation's first large‐scale nuclear powèr plant went into operation at Shippingport, Pa.
Finally, in 1971, the nation's utilities ordered just about as much nuclear capacity for their future plants as they did for conventional fossil‐fueled units. By year‐end nuclear‐fueled generators were turning out more than 3 per cent of the nation's electricity. They are expected to account for about one‐fourth of all power produced by the end of this decade.
The Atomic Industrial Forum, a nonprofit group that seeks to foster development of atomic energy for peacetime use, keeps a box score of plant orders. It showed 33 plant commitments with a total capacity of 36.3 million kilowatts in 1972.
A box score kept by the General Electric Company recorded 34 plant orders with a total capacity of 38.3 million kilowatts.
The difference would be explained by an interpretation of just what constitutes “firm commitment” and when orders were actually placed. No matter which figure is used, 1972 still emerges as the record year. The previous high was set in 1967, when 30, reactors were ordered with a total capacity of 25 million kilowatts. In 1971 the totals were 23 plants and 23 million kilowatts.
More important, the manufacturers expect a near‐record volume this year. A spokesman for the Westinghouse Electric Corporation said he looked for “between 35 million and 40 million kilowatts of nuclear orders this year.”
Milton F. Kent, G.E.'s vice president‐power generation sales, said in an interview here last week that he expected “another active year.”
“Maybe it won't be quite as high as in 1972, but it will be right up around that level,” he added.
Thomas O. Paine, vice president and group executive of G.E.'s power generation group, predicted that 1973 would be “a very active year overseas.”
Dr. Paine flew to Moscow after last Tuesday's interview and on Friday signed an agreement with the Soviet Union's State Committee for Science and Technology for “broad scientific and technical cooperation in fields of mutual interest.” While declining to put a dollar value on the agreement, Dr. Paine said it “could be worth tens and hundreds of millions of dollars.”
The forecast of about quarter of the nation's electric capacity in nuclear plants by 1980 is just about in line with predictions made in the last few years, although the growth has not been nearly as rapid as optimists were predicting in the mid‐sixties.
But the use of nuclear power plants is expected to go a long way toward solving shortages of conventional fossil fuels — coal, oil and natural gas, even though problems are expected to arise in the expanded need for fissionable material.
Uranium supplies are generally felt to be more than adequate if the price is allowed to rise, but there may be problems if the Government doesn't act soon to speed up the uranium‐enrichment program. The Atomic Industrial Forum, in a report in mid‐October, charged that the United States must “more than triple” its uranium‐enrichment capacity by 1985 to prevent nuclear power plants from running out of fuel in the nineteen‐eighties.
The report estimated the cost at $5‐billion to $7‐billion, plus an additional $2‐billion to $3‐billion to provide the electric power capacity to run the enrichment facilities.
The Atomic Energy Commission was especially pleased with last year's results. It is preparing a report on the total nuclear energy situation that will show 29 nuclear power plants classed as “operable” in this country as of Dec. 31, 1972. Their total capacity was 14.7 million kilowatts, or 3.8 per cent of the nation's total electric utility capacity of 381.7 million kilowatts as of July 31, 1972, the most recent figure from the Federal Power Commission.
The A.E.C. will also report that 55 nuclear power plants with a total capacity of about 47.8 million kilowatts are “being built,” while 76 with a total capacity of just under 80 million kilowatts are “planned.” This means that their reactors had been ordered as of the end of 1972.
Thus, the nation's nuclear plant capacity — actual and potential — stood at the new high of 142.5 million kilowatts in 160 plants as of Dec. 31, 1972.
Looking to the future, the A.E.C. predicts that in 1980 nuclear power capacity will represent “about 23 per cent” of the nation's total electric capacity, against the 3.8 per cent of the last year. Five years later nuclear power capacity is expected to account for “about 32 per cent,” then rise to “about 38 per cent” in 1990 and be “about 50 per cent” in the year 2000.
•
People in the nuclear power industry are confident of its rapid and orderly expansion despite the recent promise of Ralph Nader to “go to Congress, the courts and the stockholders of the nation's electric companies with the message that nuclear plants represent bad economics, dangerously immature science and ‘incestuous’ politics.”
Mr. Nader announced on Jan. 3 that he had joined forces with the Union of Concerned Scientists, a Cambridge, Mass., group that is opposed to the A.E.C.'s safety testing methods. He said that the issue of nuclear plant safety was of “utmost urgency.” He added, “This is the first time that this country has permitted development of an industry that can wipe this country out.”
Mr. Nader continued: “We spend billions on defense while creating a basic vulnerability here. There's no responsibility. If a nuclear plant goes, who loses his job? Who goes to jail? Who's fired? Nobody's accountable.”
Dr. Paine, who is a former head of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, indicated he wasn't surprised by Mr. Nader's charges.
“Any big program is an obvious target for Nader's Raiders',” he said with a chuckle, “Not only nuclear energy but also the whole spectrum of energy. This program will withstand any investigation. He's coming in too late in an area where others have already trod.”
Dr. Paine said Mr. Nader's arguments could be beaten “easily, just by pointing at the magnificent safety record of commercial nuclear energy. There's never been a fatality.”
Mr. Kent added that, after the lengthy hearings that have been held on the safety matter over the last year, Nader's “action is like a 10‐minute speech after a long filibuster.”
The Atomic Industrial Forum's soon‐to‐be‐released study will be headlined “The Nuclear Industry in 1972: Solid Gains, but Headaches Persist.” It will point out that utility executives were thoroughly disheartened by “the near paralysis of the A.E.C.'s licensing machinery, a hiatus that persisted for more than a year” until last May when the Virginia Electric and Power Company's Surry I reactor was allowed to begin operating. By year‐end seven other plants were cleared, though not all for full power levels.
Likewise, construction permits for new plants were blocked from March, 1971, to August, 1972, and as of Dec. 31 the A.E.C. had licensed only about half as many power reactors as it had indicated it would in a projection made two years earlier.
The delays stemmed from a court decision filed against the Calvert Cliffs nuclear power plant of the Baltimore Gas and Electric Company. Under a court decision, the A.E.C. was forced to undertake a full environmental review of the impact of each nuclear plant before granting permission to start actual power operations or testing.
The costs of delaying operation of a nuclear plant are tremendous. The Wisconsin Electric Power Company was forced in December to seek a special temporary surcharge of 5.7 per cent on retail electric rates because of delays at its Point Beach nuclear plant.
A
The utility reported then that it had filed three years and eight months earlier for the license to operate the second unit at Point Beach. Hearings began 18 months earlier, and the plant was ac tually ready to operate more than a year earlier.
The Consumers Power Company's plant at Midland, Mich., was designed to generate electricity and provide steam for the Dow Chemical Company. It was originally scheduled for completion in 1974 or 1975. Now it is expected to be at least four years late. In the meantime, the total cost has soared from the original $267‐million to more than $700‐million. The delay came from construction permit hearings that began on Dec. 1, 1970, and were adjourned 18 months later. The permit was finally granted last month.
The Atomic Industrial Forum noted that costs for building nuclear power plants are “edging toward $500 per kilowatt of installed capacity, including escalation and interest during a construction period that now stretches eight years or longer.” This compares with about $400 a kilowatt for conventional fossil‐fueled plants that can be built in five years or less.
The chief attraction of nuclear power is the relatively low fuel cost when contrasted with rapidly escalating prices for fossil fuels—coal, oil and gas—that are environmentally acceptable.
So committed to nuclear power are some utilities that the giant Commonwealth Edison Company, which has 13 nuclear plants operating, under construction or on order, has estimated that it would spend $1‐million a day over the next five years on construction, most of it nuclear.
The pace of nuclear plant ordering reached a fantastic level in December, with G.E. walking off with most of the prizes. Between Dec. 4 and Dec. 15 it received nine orders against seven earlier in the year, including foreign orders.
The Atomic Industrial Forum's 1972 domestic score card showed a total of 12 units to G.E. with a total capacityflof 13.7 million kilowatts, 12 for Westinghouse with 13.6 million kilowatts, two for Combustion Engineering with 2.04 million kilowatts and two for Gulf General Atomic with 1.54 kilowatts.
The Forum also says that the 36.3 million kilowatts ordered in 1972 was “about 55 per cent of all new generating capacity ordered” last year.
However, a tally of all electric generating capacity scheduled, but not necessarily ordered yet, shows this breakdown (in millions of kilowatts):
Nuclear 44.0
Conventional steam 45.4
Gas turbines 10.3
Total 99.7
These figures include 2.4 million kilowatts of steam turbines ordered directly from foreign manufacturers, plus 1.8 million from the Allis Kraftwerke combine. If these are eliminated (thus limiting scheduled capacity to domestic manufacture, as is the case with nuclear), there is no question but what 1972 marked the first year that nuclear power was the leading choice of domestic utilities.
By G.E.'s own reckoning, it received 43 per cent of all domestic nuclear orders in 1972 against 35.8 per cent for Westinghouse, 14.2 per cent for Babcock & Wilcox, 4 per cent for Gulf General Atomic and 3 per cent for Combustion Engineering.


Yet, in the cumulative totals for domestic nuclear plants, Westinghouse accounted for 35.8 per cent of the total to G.E.'s 37.6 per cent. Babcock & Wilcox has 12.3 per cent, Combustion Engineering 8.4 per cent and Gulf General Atomic 3.7 per cent.
G.E. believes its sudden popularity stems from a redesign of its boiling water reactor. Dr. Paine pointed out that the latest model —the BWR‐6 — recorded sales of more than $1‐billion in less than one year, generally because of its provision for broader safety margins and promise of lower cost with the implication that the newer models can be cleared for licensing quicker and easier by the A.E.C.
“No matter how you look at it. American light water reactors have swept the world, and they'll continue their dominance in the future,” Dr. Paine said.


[a]January 14, 2973
https://www.nytimes.com/1973/01/14/archives/a-building-boom-for-nuclear-power-plants-utilities-ordering-pace.html