Aiken[a] Says Giant Utilities Seek To Monopolize Nuclear Power
* WASHINGTON, March 4— Senator George D. Aiken charged today that “certain giant corporate utilities” were seeking to “monopolize and completely control” the development of nuclear power.
This nuclear gold rush for control of atomic power is further compounded,” Mr. Aiken said on the floor of the Senate “by a struggle among the industrial giants—the oil, coal and utility interests—for what in effect would be monopoly control over all electric power.”
The Vermont Republican, when he was Governor of Vermont from 1937 to 1939, had a record as a champion of consumer interests and a foe of big, privately wilted utilities. As a Senator, he has supported strict enforcement of the antitrust laws.
In support of his charge today, Mr. Aiken cited the steadfast opposition of the utility corporations to legislation that would subject the utilities to what he called “reasonable regulatory controls under the Atomic Energy Act.”
Senator Aiken has proposed the legislation over the last two years.
The Federal Power Commission licenses only hydroelectric plants. The Atomic Energy Commission, which sets the health and safety requirements for atomic reactors, licenses nu clear power plants.
Member of Joint Panel
Mr. Aiken, a member of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, said that there were now 70 atomic power plants generating power or under construction, and that there would be 92 by June 30, 1971. By 1980, he said, the Atomic Energy Commission estimates that there will be 200 installed atomic power units capable of generating 150 million kilowatts. At today's prices, he said, the total investment in these plants by 1980 would be 540‐billion
More than 52.3‐billion in Federal money, Mr. Aiken said, was invested in the research to Make these power 1:eactors profitable, and that “this investment of public money was made by Congress in hopes of developing commercially ‐ feasible, competitive atomic power.”
“Therefore,” the Senator continued, “the municipals, rural cooperatives, and small, in resto r‐owned utilities have an Inalienable right to Shard in the Benefits of nuclear power,”
Later today, Senator Philip A. Hart, Democrat of Michigan, announced that the Senate Antitrust and Monopoly Sub committee, which he heads, would investigate the electric generating industry.
While conceding that the Atomic Energy Act needed updating to make certain that nuclear power plants were Made subject to antitrust control, Mr. Aiken was sharply critical of the Atomic Energy Commission for not taking the steps it could under existing law “to protect the public interest.”
All that the A.E.C. has to ‘do, he said, in order to bring the atomic power plants within the purview of the antitrust laws, find that the plants have “practical value in a commercial sense” and then issue commercial license to operate after the ‘plant has been finished.
But, Mr. Aiken said, the A.E.C. has not once made such a finding or issued such a license. Instead, it hag ‘licensed each new plant “as a research project under the medical section of the law.” Furthermore, he said, “the deliberate policy of delay in issuing commercial licenses]. is ‘further cornPounded by ‘., the issuance of research licenses of.40 years’ duration.”
“The failure of the A.E.C. to make any practical‐value’ finding naturally pleases the utilities and their friends, because it leaves them free from antitrust regulation,” Mr. Aiken said.
A.E.C. officials, when questioned today, acknowledged that there had not been a single finding of “practical value,” not a single commercial license issued, for a nuclear plant. In explaining why this was so, they cited three sections of the Atomic'EnergyMt.
The first section gives the A.E.C authority to license power reactors for “research and development activities leading the demonstration of the practical value of such facilitieS for industrial or commercial purposes.”
7711‐6. the second section says that, when the AX.C. has made a finding. of practical value in writing, it may issue a commercial license.
The third section says that, when the A.E.C. is going to issue a commercial license, it must get the Attorney Gen eral's opinion on whether such a license “would tend to create or maintain P asituation in consistent with the antitrust laws.”


[a]March 5, 1970
https://www.nytimes.com/1970/03/05/archives/aiken-says-giant-utilities-seek-to-monopolize-nuclear-power-tells.html