Is[a] Nuclear Too Costly?
* Skyrocketing construction costs and puzzling patterns in the use of electricity have slowed the development of nuclear energy in the United States in a way that the opponents of nuclear power probably never imagined, in their wildest dreams.
Despite the fact that the utility industry and Federal energy planners feel that nuclear power is essential for energy independence as well as for restraining the upward climb of rates, nuclear power has become unaffordable “necessity.” Consequently, a number of utilities are cancelling nuclear projects.
Middle South Utilities, Inc., a holding company based in New Orleans, is a case in point.
“Our decision to cancel the two nuclear units [in June] and defer construction of another was simply a question of our ability to finance them and the pattern of use of electricity in recent months by our customers,” said Floyd Lewis, president of Middle South.
“Our peak load this year was three‐tenths of a percent below that of 1974,” Mr. Lewis added. “It occurred in April instead of August for the first time in 20 years.”
And overall growth in electric power for Middle South has risen only a few percentage points above last year's level, which was far below the 1973 level, he said.
More important though was the cost of the two cancelled nuclear units Middle South was proposing to build. It went from $1.3‐billion three years ago to $2.3‐billion currently, “and we figured they got too expensive,” Mr. Lewis said.
Although fossil‐fired power plants have also been rising in cost for construction and catching up with nuclear plants, nuclear units still cost more and take longer to build.
Since 1970 the cost of building power plants has soared, according to Leonard F. C. Reichle, vice president for nuclear at Ebasco Services, Inc., one of the major architectural and construction engineering companies for electric power plants.
The cost of building a nuclear reactor has risen to $1,135 per kilowatt of capacity this year from roughly $300 per kilowatt of capacity in 1970. For fossil‐fired plants (those that use coal, gas or oil), the average cost has risen to $950 per kilowatt of capacity including pollution control equipment from $220 per kilowatt of capacity in 1970.
At Middle South the situation is much the same. Cost estimates are that the nuclear system would cost the company roughly $600 to $900 per kilowatt of capacity and the coal‐fired units $450 or more per kilowatt of capacity.
Mr. Lewis said that given his company's depressed earnings and unpredictable customer‐use patterns, it would be a long time before Middle South considered putting plans for nuclear units back into its construction schedule. And Middle South is not the only company abandoning nuclear power.
When the Houston Power and Lighting Company last month dropped plans to construct a 2‐unit, 2,400‐megawatt nuclear plant; it cited higher construction costs and its inability to finance these and several other plants. It also said that “the past year has shown some indications of a slower rate of growth in the area's electrical requirements.”
Several other utilities have been selling or trying to sell their interests in ongoing nuclear‐plant projects for some of the same reasons:
¶The Green Mountain Power Corporation, a small Vermont utility, has scheduled a special shareholders' meeting Dec. 5 to vote on a management proposal to sell the company's small interest in three nuclear‐power plants. If the sale is made, the company will recover $2.6‐million already invested in the projects.
¶The San Diego Gas and Electric Company, a big California utility, has invited public and privately held utilities to become part‐owners of its Sundesert nuclear plant project.
The Tucson Gas and Electric Company has sold its 15.4 per cent interest in the Arizona nuclear power project for $7‐million to the Southern California Edison Company. It gave reduced load projections as the reason for the sale.
The Consolidated Edison Company of New York, one of the first companies to abandon nuclear power in a big way, is negotiating the sale of its Indian Point No. 3 nuclear plant (yet to be completed) to New York State for $350‐million.
“Utilities are coming around now saying they're only going to build what they can afford,” said Richard C. Toole, utility analyst for Bache & Co., a leading brokerage house.
“You're really talking about economics now,” Mr. Toole added. “If kilowatt hour sales start to come back, I think these companies are going to find that they've got to build these power plants sooner than they thought. Think they've got to make the decision all over again of do they go with nuclear power or do they go fossil fuel.”
Some people might argue that there is really nothing to debate about when comparing the costs of producing electricity with a nuclear facility or a fossil‐fired plant. But the economic gap between the two, in which nuclear proved to be cheaper for many utilities that built their plants much earlier, has narrowed substantially, according to Mr. Reichle of Ebasco. And not every utility executive is so convinced today as he may have been five years ago that nuclear power is the right choice.
“We don't have any coal fired plants now, but in our case looking at coal vs. nuclear power the main consideration is what it costs to move coal here from Wyoming,” Mr. Lewis of Middle South said.
“If you can only move coal by rail, then you go to nuclear power,” he said. “But if you can move it by coal slurry pipeline [as his company has proposed] the pendulum swings hack to fossil.”
Nuclear power's advantage over fossil‐fired power systems has always been that, although it cost more to build a nuclear power plant, the cost of producing electricity per kilowatt‐hour with nuclear reactors was much cheaper than with a conventional fuel system. Over the life of a plant, therefore, nuclear power would be cheaper.
But with the spiral in construction costs in the early nineteen‐seventies, followed by the Arab oil embargo of October, 1973, which had the effect of raising the price of uranium, and then reduced customer use, the economics of nuclear began to be questioned more.
Companies that had plants online, such as the Commonwealth Edison Company in Chicago, might be able to show Cheaper costs, some would say, but what about the nuclear plant not set to come on line until 1985?
Kenneth Hollister, an analyst for Dean Witter & Co., raised that question in a recent interview, pointing to the rising costs of uranium. Before the embargo, uranium sold for $7 a pound. It now brings $24 or more.
“In the beginning nuclear power was going to come in at a quarter of the cost of a coal plant over the life of tile entire system,” Mr. Hollister said. “No more.”
“In terms of plants, the social [pollution‐control] requirements have equated the price of a fossil plant with that of a nuclear plant. And now the emergence of the fuel situation will make them even.”
Although almost 50 per cent of orders for power‐generating plants on the books of the utility industry are for nuclear units, much of what has not already been dropped has been deferred for up to five or more years. And while some power generation companies insist that the business is still good because of the back orders, they concede they do not know when the present lull will end.
“Business has turned down quite a bit, and it's really been evident this year,” said Earl Dubois, general manager of water reactor division marketing for the Westinghouse Electric Corporation, the nation's largest builder of nuclear power plants.
At Westinghouse, 70 percent of back orders for nuclear plants have been deferred. And since January, 1974, six orders for nuclear reactors have been canceled. This year it has received orders for four reactors.
Industrywide, an unofficial tabulation of cancellations showed that orders for 13 nuclear reactors have been canceled this year, more than half of them because of financial problems at the utilities and uncertainty over the need for the plants.
Some energy‐industry observers who follow the electric utility business closely have said privately that they expect no orders for nuclear reactors next year.
The cancellations of the large nuclear units and also fossil units has brought its share of alarming comments from the utility industry, the most prevailing one being that the nation is headed for an energy shortage by the end of the decade because of a lack of power plants.
But while the debate heats up over whether there will be a season of brownouts and blackouts, the energy leaders say the only hope for a turnaround in their present condition is a turnaround in the electric‐utility business.
Their recipe for recovery includes more and bigger power‐rate increases, a lessening of the time required in the regulatory process for building nuclear‐power plants as part of over‐all reduced regulation and perhaps some help from the proposed $100‐billion Federal energy agency.


[a]October 5, 1975
https://www.nytimes.com/1975/10/05/archives/is-nuclear-too-costly-expenses-soar-as-demand-softens.html