Nuclear[a] Power Arrives—Again
* “It's been a helluva good year for nuclear power,” Ellis T. Cox said last week.
Howard M. Winterson agreed. And so did Dr. A. Eugene Shubert and Joseph C. Rengel. The four are the leading competitors in the big business of making nuclear power plants and equipment. Mr. Cox is vice president of the power generation division of the Bab cock & Wilcox Company; Mr. Winterson, vice president of the combustion division of Combustion Engineering, Inc.; Dr. Shubert, vice president of the nuclear energy division of the General Electric Company, and Mr. Rengel, executive vice president of the nuclear energy systems division of the Westinghouse Electric Corporation.
To date this year, the domestic electric utilities have placed orders for 16 nuclear power plants with a total capacity of 16,687,000 kilowatts. This is already the third largest year to date and may even move to second best if several pending orders are awarded before Dec. 31.
The best year to date was 1967 when utilities bought 29 nuclear power plants with a total capacity of 25,300,000 kilowatts. A year earlier the totals were 24 plants and 19, 500,000 kilowatts of capacity.
But the ordering pace slowed down to a trickle in 1968 as only 10 orders were placed for some 8,845,000 kilowatts. Last year the doldrums continued—eight orders for 8,088,000 kilowatts — as many utilities post poned their purchases because of a combination of disillusionment over delays in building plants laid to labor problems and the opposition of environmentalists and others.
Such obstructions seemed to have little effect on orders this year, due mainly to the problems of dwindling supplies of fossil fuels — coal, oil or gas; the lack of sulphur‐free or low pollutant content coal and oil, and rising prices of all but nuclear fuels.
Many in the industry feel that when the Tennessee Valley Authority ordered four giant nuclear plants — two each from Westinghouse and Babcock & Wilcox — because of its inability to secure long‐term coal deliveries, other utilities decided it best to consider nuclear power again.
Mr. Rengel pointed out that while capital costs for nuclear plants have soared —about 140 percent between 1966 and 1970, according to Dr. Glenn Seaborg, chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission — many utilities have found that the reduction of nuclear fuel prices more than compensates for the initial capital charges.
“Let's face it, electric utilities are now faced with gas that will become absolutely unavailable in the long term,” Mr. Rengel said. “Oil prices keep rising as air pollution requirements stiffen and no one can even guess where coal prices will top out.”
Both he and James Birle, manager of marketing for G. E.'s atomic power equipment department, reported that they had been approached by utilities in Texas and other areas of the South west that are now looking into the possibility of building nuclear plants.
“Even in the gas producing regions, they're beginning to worry about fuel supplies,” Mr. Birle added.
There are 17 nuclear power plants operating in the United States. Two others, the Monticello plant owned by Northern States Power Company in Minnesota and the Palisades plant of the Consumers Power Company in Michigan, are operable but have been held up pending the outcome of hearings instituted by environmentalists.
Mr. Birle believes that eventually the environmentalists will support nuclear power as the best means of generating electricity with the least possible harm to the environment.
“The general public is very much confused over nuclear power,” Mr. Birle, said in a telephone interview last week. “With nuclear we have a split in the academic community that is almost unique. This creates confusion in the public mind but we firmly believe that the views of scientists supporting nuclear power will prevail.
“Once the general public analyzes the need for improving living standards and that solutions to urban ills — transportation, sewage, water and air purification — can best be achieved through electricity, nuclear power will win out.”
One effect of the potential public opposition to nuclear power plants has been that utilities place their orders some two or three years earlier than load forecasts dictate, thus allowing time for prolonged delays.
Dr. Shubert added that this practice would also develop with conventional fossil‐fueled plants as the public demands safeguards before allowing utilities to tamper with land or water in building their plants or rights‐of‐way.
G. E. leads the atomic sweepstakes both in orders this year and in the cumulative total. To date this year the company has received orders for six plants with a total capacity of some 6 million kilowatts. Combustion Engineering has four with a total capacity of some 4.3 million kilowatts. Westinghouse has received a like number, including one for Puerto Rico, with some 3.7 million kilowatts. Bab cock & Wilcox, which has been plagued with a backlog of unfilled orders, received only two plant orders this year with a total capacity of 2.5 million kilowatts.
Mr. Winterson said there is “a reasonably good chance that there will be at least one and possibly two major nuclear plant orders before year‐end.” The Pacific Gas and Electric Company is expected to decide on a 1.1 million kilowatt plant and the South Carolina Electric and Gas Company is working on an order for a plant of about 800,000 kilowatts.
G. E. recently released a summary of all nuclear power plants ordered through last Oct. 14 by utilities in the United States and abroad. It showed G. E. with a total of 42 domestic and 13 foreign plants for a total of 40,346,000 kilowatts and 40.5 percent of the market.
Westinghouse was second with 37 domestic and 11 foreign plants totaling 36,165, 000 kilowatts and a 36.2 per cent share.
Babcock & Wilcox with 14 domestic plants rated at 11, 751,000 kilowatts was third with an 11.8 percent slice. Combustion Engineering was a close fourth with 12 plants and 11,023,000 kilowatts for 11 per cent. The Gulf‐General Atomics division of the Gulf Oil Corporation has received two domestic orders for a total of 350,000 kilowatts and a 0.5 per cent market share.
“We're basing our planning on an expected total of four plants next year and estimate the industry will order between 16 million and 20 million kilowatts of nuclear plants again in 1971,” Mr. Cox said, adding:
“Nineteen seventy‐one will be a function of how well we handle our public information for the nuclear industry. We'll have to tell our story on a level of intelligence that will reach the man on the street who is being inflamed by professional intervenors.”
Mr. Winterson agrees that 1971 should be about the same level as this year “if the price of fossil fuels keeps escalating.”
“Next year should be between 20 million and 25 million kilowatts, or as good or better than this year,” Mr. Rengel predicted.
“We started 1970 as the only ones who were really optimistic,” Dr. Shubert and Mr. Birle said. “We think 1971 will be substantially better and may even exceed 1967.”


[a]November 29, 1970
https://www.nytimes.com/1970/11/29/archives/nuclear-power-arrives-again-utilities-1970-orders-of-aplants-soar.html